10 Deadly Mistakes to Avoid When Learning Java

To code or not to code? It seems that you’ve made your choice in favor of the first option. Programming is a great field for professional growth, It gives you an opportunity to take part in interesting projects and work wherever you want.

The only obstacle that restrains many beginners from starting a new career is the lack of understanding of how exactly should they learn to code. What’s more important is that even the best universities can’t fully provide the education, which will guarantee a stark career as a software developer. The thing is that programming is too dynamic and flexible: once you start learning, you better do it for the rest of your life.

Some programmers say, that they’ve been trying to learn how to code a few times before finally reaching their goal. Yes, we all learn through mistakes, but you’ll be surprised how many common lapses are there in mastering this skill.

Troubleshooting your learning experience
If you’re determined to learn Java programming, here are few useful thoughts for you. Let’s talk about mistakes, which almost all beginners do.

Too many research, too little practice
Here’s what happens when you try to learn to code the ordinary way. All of us are used to study by reading books: the thicker the book, the more knowledge you will get, right? Sorry, this is not the case for programming.

A lack of practice in coding is fatal. Just start coding. Start from the first day of your study and practice every single day. You won’t learn to box or dance by watching videos. And you won’t get confident in coding unless you make it your daily habit.

2. Endless studying without a certain goal

Some students, despite their age, simply love to learn. It’s the process, not the result they aim for. Of course, it’s always great to broaden your scope, but you will probably agree that there’s no point in wasting hundreds (if not thousands of hours) to get a trendy hobby.

In coding, even if sometimes it’s kinda tough for you, you simply love it or not. Developers, that code just to earn more money, won’t get hired to Google or other company with a big name.

Because programming is simply not their vocation. Likewise, if it’s your passion, but you’re not ready to practice every day, programming might also be not for you.

3. Trying to reach too many technologies at once

Software development is a deep ocean of data and tools. If you try to learn everything that pops up and seems interesting, you might get stuck at the beginning totally confused.

This is why you need a certain plan, that in your case should include Java Core, coding projects plus the programming tools. It will also help you avoid the risk of being a lifelong learner and set your education in a defined timeframe.

4. Making gaps in your education

Remember that “code every day” motto of learning Java? Good. Think about it every time you have a lure to skip a few days of education. Taking a break as a beginner is more dangerous than it seems.

You start a new subject and it refers to the previous background which you already don’t remember at all. Such surprising “amnesia” will constantly drag you back, so do your best to move forward without any breaks.

5. Thinking that the only thing you need to start coding is knowing Java language

A language is a tool in the hands of a skilled creator. Some might say that you need to be brilliant at math to learn to code — no, you don’t. But knowing how to write the code won’t make you a programmer, too.

Programming needs plenty of other skills: a strong logic, problem-solving, the ability to visualize the structure and sequence of processes. An experienced programmer doesn’t start to write code before thinking through the logic of the solution.